[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Within the emerging
field of energy medicine,
one modality is quickly
proving itself to be unusually
effective in bringing about
immediate psychological relief
and is done with just
the tap of a finger.
This is Gaia News.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Emotional Freedom
Techniques, or EFT,
is a powerful
self-healing practice
which seeks to address
psychological issues by working
with energy channels
in the body.
Also known as
tapping, it combines
modern psychological
therapies with ancient healing
technology.
Specifically, EFT
incorporates the principles
of acupressure, which involves
the application of pressure
to specific points in the body
thought for thousands of years
to clear blockages along
energy channels or meridians.
Doctor Dawson Church is a
health and science writer
who has been
researching, practicing,
and teaching EFT for decades.
>> EFT's history goes
back thousands of years.
Researchers have
discovered mummies
from Europe that are 5,000 years
old with these tapping points
tattooed on their bodies.
And acupressure is simply
pressure on acupuncture points.
Like we would normally
use needling on them,
instead we use pressure,
and one fingertip
tapping on those points.
What we do with EFT
is we simply organize
several of the most potent
points of acupuncture
into a little ritual so
you can remember to tap.
And the research shows that
if you take somebody who's
stressed, the emotional
brain, the central part
of the brain, the limbic
system, is highly active.
When you have them tap while
remembering a painful incident,
it simply calms the brain
down in a few seconds.
>> Just what is the
mechanism at work here?
>> We are energy beings.
We may be physical
beings on the outside.
But we have
electrons and protons
and neutrons and photons and all
kinds of energy in our bodies.
Energy flows to the body, and
it flows in these channels.
When we tap on our
acupressure points,
that produces a calming
piezoelectric signal.
It travels through
our connective tissue
to the source of distress,
and rapidly calms it down.
>> Recent research has
shown that EFT is remarkably
effective for addressing
psychological issues,
such as depression and anxiety,
and is especially helpful
in cases of emotional
trauma and PTSD.
>> When you tap, it
shifts your energy flows.
It shifts your brain.
And you start to release
all that emotion.
So you're now remembering all
of the bad stuff of your life.
And you're giving your brain
two conflicting signals.
The one signal is freak out.
Get stressed.
Remember the car crash.
Remember going to war.
Remember the explosion.
Remember the terrible divorce.
Remember the horrible fight.
So now, your emotional
brain is getting one signal
from your memory, which is
go into fight or flight.
Now, it's getting a
second conflicting signal
from acupressure,
which is, you're OK.
You survived.
And you're correcting your
energy flows right now.
When faced with those two
mutually exclusive signals,
the brain prioritizes the
physical signal of safety.
When you do that, you
can remember the event.
You recall the event still.
You no longer have
an emotional reaction
to the event, which is why
we call it emotional freedom
techniques.
>> Given the high rates of
PTSD in military veterans,
Doctor Church has done a
great deal of work with this
vulnerable population
with great success.
In a recent study
of veterans, EFT
was found to have a profound
effect on participants' genes.
>> One of the most exciting new
fields of science is looking
at these tiny molecules
called microRNAs.
And they stick to genes.
If they adhere to genes,
they silence those genes.
And that silencing can have
effects on both your body
and your mind.
We did one study of
veterans, and these veterans
got 10 EFT sessions.
We looked at their
gene expression.
We found that they had
increased expression
of genes that suppress
inflammation and boost
immunity.
So these veterans were having an
epigenetic effect from tapping.
We looked deeper
at the microRNAs.
And we found that there
are little microRNAs that
are associated with depression.
If these microRNAs are
sticking to the genes,
you're more likely
to be depressed.
In that study, we found those
microRNAs literally popping off
the genes as the
levels of depression
in those veterans lifted.
>> Another fascinating recent
study looked at the effects
of EFT on various
physiological markers,
including those having
to do with immunity.
>> We've done several
studies of EFT immunity.
And in one of them,
we found that people
meditating and
tapping for a week
had a dramatic drop in cortisol.
Now, when cortisol
drops, all kinds
of positive things
in the body rise.
And the thing we measured that
rose the most was a molecule
called immunoglobulin.
And it protects you against
bacteria and viruses.
We found that levels
of immunoglobulins
in just one week of meditation
and tapping rose by 113%.
>> While the tapping technique
can be learned through various
online resources, Doctor Church
cautions that those dealing
with serious emotional trauma
should work with a trained
professional.
For Doctor Church, the
implications of EFT
are far reaching.
>> As we deploy these
psychological techniques,
psychological therapies widely,
we're going to see massive
drops in anxiety,
depression, PTSD, phobias,
and other forms of stress.
And that will produce
an enormous liberation
of human potential because
if people aren't then
functioning with all those
epigenetic emotional and
physical weights on
their lives, they
will then become the people
that they were meant to be.
So we're at the beginning of
a huge shift in mental health
now just as we were
at the beginning
of a huge shift in physical
health a century ago.
And that change will produce
massive shifts globally.
>> For a new perspective,
this is Gaia News.
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.
[MUSIC PLAYING]